\documentclass[a4paper,11pt]{article}

\usepackage{StealthNet}

% Graphics directory
\ifpdf
    % pdflatex requires bitmap images.
    \graphicspath{{./img/png/}}
\else
    % latex requires vector images.
    \graphicspath{{./img/eps/}}
\fi

% Title page details
\title{StealthNet Security Implementation: \\ Project 2}
\author{Joshua Spence \\ 308216350 \and Ahmad Al Mutawa \\ 312003919 \and James Moutafidis \\ 420105464}
\date{May 2012}

%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
\begin{document}

\maketitle

% INTRODUCTION
\section{Introduction}
In this assignment, the security mechanisms implemented previously in 
\packageName{} were extended to include asymmetric encryption, password-based 
file encryption and a secure online payment system.

% ASYMMETRIC ENCRYPTION
\section{Asymmetric Encryption}

\subsection{Introduction}
Asymmetric encryption refers to an encryption system in which two separate keys 
are used --- namely, a \emph{public key} and a \emph{private key}. The public 
key is used for encryption \textbf{only} and the private key is used for
decryption \textbf{only}. The keys are so named because the public key may be 
made public --- it doesn't matter who has knowledge of this key because all that
this key allows is the encryption of messages, not the decryption of messages. 
Similarly, and more importantly, the private key must be kept private.

Although unrelated, the two parts of the key pair are mathematically linked. The
public key is used to transform a message into an unreadable form, decryptable 
only by using the (different but matching) private key. By publishing the public
key, the key producer empowers anyone who gets a copy of the public key to 
produce messages only they can read --- because only the key producer has a copy
of the private key (required for decryption). When someone wants to send a 
secure message to the creator of those keys, the sender encrypts it (i.e., 
transforms it into an unreadable form) using the intended recipient's public 
key; to decrypt the message, the recipient uses the private key. No one else, 
including the sender, can do so.

Thus, unlike symmetric key algorithms, a public key algorithm does not require a
secure initial exchange of one, or more, secret keys between the sender and 
receiver. These algorithms work in such a way that, while it is easy for the 
intended recipient to generate the public and private keys and to decrypt the 
message using the private key, and while it is easy for the sender to encrypt 
the message using the public key, it is extremely difficult for anyone to figure
out the private key based on their knowledge of the public key. They are based 
on mathematical relationships (the most notable ones being the integer 
factorization and discrete logarithm problems) that have no efficient solution.

\subsection{Details}
\algorithm{RSA} is an algorithm for public-key cryptography that is based on the
presumed difficulty of factoring large integers, the factoring problem. A user 
of \algorithm{RSA} creates and then publishes the product of two large prime 
numbers, along with an auxiliary value, as their public key. The prime factors 
must be kept secret. Anyone can use the public key to encrypt a message, but 
with currently published methods, if the public key is large enough, only 
someone with knowledge of the prime factors can feasibly decode the message. 

A simple explanation of the various stages of the \algorithm{RSA} algorithm is 
as follows:

\paragraph{Key generation}
\begin{enumerate}
\item Generate two large prime numbers, $p$ and $q$.
\item Let $n = pq$.
\item Let $m = (p-1)(q-1)$.
\item Choose a small number $e$, coprime to $m$.
\item Find $d$, such that $de \mod m = 1$.
\item Publish $e$ and $n$ as the public key.
\item Keep $d$ and $n$ as the secret key.
\end{enumerate}

\paragraph{Encryption}
\begin{math}
C = P^{e} \mod n
\end{math}

\paragraph{Decryption}
\begin{math}
P = C^{d} \mod n
\end{math}

\subsection{Justification}
\algorithm{RSA} is a well-studied and well-tested asymmetric encryption 
algorithm that has proven itself to be sufficient for modern security 
requirements. However, as with every algorithm, the real strength of an 
encryption scheme is in its key length. In our implementation we have selected a
2048-bit key size. Studies have suggested that a 2048-bit \algorithm{RSA} key is 
similar in strength to a 112-bit symmetric key. It is also estimated that a 
2048-bit key should be sufficient until the year 2030. Given that 18 years is a 
very long time in the scheme of software and computing generally, 2030 seems 
like a valid deadline for either increasing the size of the \algorithm{RSA} keys
or adopting a newer encryption algorithm.

\subsection{Implementation}
Asymmetric encryption is implemented in \packageName{} on top of the \\
\verb+Encryption+ and \verb+AsymmetricEncryption+ base classes. In particular, 
the \\ \verb+RSAAsymmetricEncryption+ class implements the \algorithm{RSA} 
algorithm. \algorithm{RSA encryption} is implemented as a feature of the 
\serviceName{} \verb+Comms+ class, however all \verb+Comms+ for any given 
\serviceName{} peer will use identical public-private keys, it is only the peer 
public keys that will differ.

The \verb+Encryption+ base class provides methods \verb+encrypt(byte[])+ and 
\verb+decrypt(byte[])+ for encryption with the peer's public key and decryption 
with the local private key, respectively.  The \verb+AsymmetricEncryption+ base 
class requires a public-private key pair for instantiation, but setting of the 
peer's public key (for encryption) can be delayed until a later stage.

Packed into the JAR file of the StealthNet executables is the public key of the 
\serviceName{} server and the \serviceName{} bank. By reading these public keys 
from the JAR archive, a \serviceName{} is able to make a secure connection to 
the \serviceName{} server, as well as the \serviceName{} bank, without needing 
to worry about the possibility of a man-in-the-middle attack. If an attacker 
does attempt such an attack, they would be unable to decrypt the transmitted 
packets because they have been encrypted with the server/bank's public key.

Whilst the clients are aware of the server and bank public keys, the server and 
the bank are unaware of the public keys of all of the clients. For this reason, 
when a client first creates a connection to a \serviceName{} server or bank, the
first (encrypted) data that is sent is the client's public key. Once the server
has received this public key of the client, the server can itself encrypt 
client-bound messages.

\algorithm{RSA encryption} is initialised in the \verb+initiateSession()+ 
function of the \verb+Comms+ class, after a communications socket has been 
established. The initiator of the connection (usually the client), sends their
public key to the other party (usually but not always a server) in encrypted 
form, but only if the other party does not already have this public key 
(maintained with the \verb+peerHasPublicKey+ variable. Once the public key has 
been transmitted, the \serviceName{} peer calls the \verb+recvPublicKey()+ 
function, rejecting all incoming packets until the peer receives the initiating 
party's public key. Similarly to the initiating party, the party that is 
accepting the connection only waits for the peer's public key value if it does 
already possess this value (maintained through the condition \\
\verb+symmetricEncryptionProvider.getPeerPublicKey() == null+).

In situations in which a client is connecting to a \serviceName{} server or 
bank, the client will already possess the public key of the server/bank, but the
server/bank will not possess the public key of the client. In situations in 
which a client is connecting to another client, the server informs both parties 
of the public key such that both parties can perform asymmetric encryption from 
the commencement of the communication.
 
% FILE ENCRYPTION
\section{File Encryption}

\subsection{Introduction}
File encryption is required within \packageName{} to protect the private keys of
\serviceName{} peers from being stolen by an attacker and consequently used by 
the attacker to masquerade as a legitimate user. To achieve this, \packageName{}
uses password-based encryption to encrypt the private key data before it is 
written to disk. Password-based file encryption differs from \packageName{} 
packet encryption in that the key (password) for file encryption has a much 
longer lifetime than the key used for packet encryption and decryption. The key 
used for password-based encryption is likely to change infrequently, if at all, 
because the user is required to remember the password in order to decrypt the 
file. The keys used in packet encryption, however, are usually only valid for 
the duration of a session and are regenerated for the next session.

\subsection{Details}
Password-based file encryption within \packageName{} is implemented using 
``JCE'' (Java Crypto Extensions), using features provided by ``BouncyCastle''
--- an open source collection of encryption APIs. The particular algorithm used 
for password-based encryption is \verb+PBEWithSHAAnd3KeyTripleDES+ from the 
``BouncyCastle'' API. This is password based encryption with an \verb+SHA+ 
digest and 3-key Triple DES encryption.

In addition, an 8-byte salt is used to initialise the encryption and decryption 
ciphers, to make bulk cracking of password files difficult. The 8-byte salt is 
randomly generated using an \verb+SHA1+ \verb+SecureRandom+ pseudo-random 
number generator. As an additional parameter to the algorithm, the password 
encryption algorithm undergoes 1000 iterations to achieve the final encrypted 
data.

\subsection{Implementation}
Password-based encryption is implemented in the \verb+PasswordEncryption+ class,
as a subclass of the \verb+Encryption+ base class. In this sense, the password
encryption mechanism is flexible because it can also be applied to 
\serviceName{} packets. In order to save private keys to a password-protected
file, an \verb+EncryptedFile+ class was created, which allows the creation of 
an encrypted file from raw (unencrypted) data and a user-supplied password. The 
class also allows for the reading and decryption of encrypted files from the 
file system.

The encrypted files consists of four fields --- the \verb+salt+, the 
\verb+passwordHash+, the \verb+data+ and the \verb+messageDigest+. The salt is 
stored as the first 8 bytes of the encrypted file and is necessary in order to
decrypt the encrypted file. Conveniently, storing the salt in an unencrypted 
format does not jeopardise the security of the encrypted file.

The password hash is the \verb+SHA1+ hash of the password that is used to 
encrypt and decrypt the file. Its purpose is to allow for a quick (and only 
partially accurate) validation of the input password. If the input password does
not hash to the same value contained in the file, then either the input password
is incorrect or the file was been modified in some way.

% ASYMMETRIC VERIFICATION
\section{Asymmetric Verification}

\subsection{Introduction}
Verification is a means to confirm the authenticity of a communication. 
Asymmetric verification relies on the use of public-private keys to allow a 
sender to \emph{sign} a message as being authentic and a receiver to
\emph{verify} that the message is authentic and originated from the expected 
source (the sender).

\subsection{Details}
The same \algorithm{RSA} algorithm that was used for asymmetric encryption can 
also be used for asymmetric verification, albeit in a different manner. To use 
\algorithm{RSA} to sign and verify messages, the sender's private key is used 
to \emph{sign} a message and the sender's public key to \emph{verify} a message.
Apart from this subtlety the two algorithms are otherwise identical, and in fact
the same public-private key path can be used for both processes --- simplifying 
the task of key management.

\subsection{Implementation}
Asymmetric verification is implemented in \packageName{} using the \\
\verb+AsymmetricVerification+ base class. More specifically, asymmetric 
verification with \algorithm{RSA} is implemented in the 
\verb+SHA1withRSAAsymmetricVerification+ class. These classes are almost 
identical to their encryption counterparts \verb+AsymmetricEncryption+ and 
\verb+RSAAsymmetricEncryption+.

% PAYMENT PROTOCOL
\section{Payment Protocol}

\subsection{Introduction}
Payment protocols are a key ingredient for online transactions, as they allow 
users to transfer money over the internet while maintaining a high standard of 
security. While this modern method of payment with virtual money costs 
significantly less than the traditional systems (cash, checks, etc.), it must be
implemented in such a way so that online currency functions in the same way as 
real money, while also featuring additional attributes.

Amongst other things, online payment protocols must ensure anonymity so that 
users need not provide personal information when sending or receiving money. 
They must also make it impossible to use a digital coin more than once to 
prevent customers from spending more than they have, and allow electronic money 
to be divisible (no need to use change during a payment). In addition, online 
cash should be resistant to modification when exchanged, and support 
authentication and verification by various organizations (i.e. the bank).

\subsection{Details}
The security mechanism of online payment relies on RSA public-key cryptography. 
By using the RSA algorithm, the system is capable of limiting cases of online 
fraud by using a digital signature on each coin, which can be used by the 
organization responsible of the service and distribution of e-currency, to 
authenticate coins when needed. For example, to sign a coin, a bank uses its 
private key for ``encryption'' (it actually decrypts), so that if a user wants to 
verify the authenticity of the coin, it uses the public key of the bank. RSA is 
also responsible for maintaining anonymity through the system, as with the 
public and private keys, users can sign transactions without providing personal 
information.

To create the actual digital currency, hash functions (such as MD5 and SHA-1) 
are used to generate hash chains that represent money in a user's account. In 
order to prevent replay attacks, where someone spends the same coin more than 
once, a nonce is appended to each hash coin so that, when sent to the bank, are 
recorded in the database as spent.

\subsection{Justification}
For the creation of hash chains for the digital coins, the MD5 algorithm is used
as it is secure enough for preventing online fraud for the system. For the 
communication between the server, bank and client, the RSA algorithm is 
implemented to allow encryption and decryption based on the public and private 
keys of the users.

\subsection{Implementation}
The main classes that are created to support the CryptoCredits system are the 
Bank and BankThread, the CryptoCreditHashChain (along with updates to the Client
and ServerThread classes), and RSAAssymetricEncryption.

The first two classes are responsible for maintaining the bank system, where 
hash chains and payments are verified with the use of digital signatures and 
encryptions/decryptions in the signHashChain() function and verifyPayment() 
respectively. It also keeps a record of each user's credit balance at the bank.

The third class maintains the state of the hash chain for each user, and is 
created at the beginning of the Client application (located within the Client 
class). It is responsible for the creation and delivery of a hash chain tuple to
the bank for signing. The related Client class also manages payment packets 
received from the bank and server, indicating the action expected from the 
client in order to complete a transaction. The ServerThread class also supports 
clients to store coins in a server credit account, along with all the necessary 
functions so that users can use these credits to pay for a secret or transfer 
money from either the bank or their own towards the server.

The final class stores the encrypt() and decrypt() functions that use the public
and private keys used by the RSA algorithm, and also generates and distributes 
keys when necessary to users across the network.

% CONCLUSION
\section{Conclusion}
% TODO

\end{document}
